Update Google Cloud deployment guide (#1551)
vaadin/docs: articles/production/cloud-providers/google/index.adoc

---

> title: Google App Engine

Reviewer: We should keep "Google Cloud" as the title, and in the heading. 

The point of including the cloud-deployment guides is to tell Vaadin users that you _can_ deploy a Vaadin app to those providers. We are telling them "_here is one simple example to demonstrate that this is possible". Here Google App Engine is not the point in itself. Rather the point is to signal to people that there is nothing to prevent you from deploying Vaadin apps to Google Cloud.

Author: GAE is quite a specialized runtime environment, so I guess it deserved its own doc.

Since we have only demonstrated deployment with only one Google Cloud product, I guess it is fine to keep Google Cloud as the title for now. If more docs are added in the future for other GC products, I believe that we should itemize the docs by GC product.

You will then be asked to select a region.
You may want to choose the region that is geographically closest to your users.

> == Step 5: Create a Production Build and Deploy the Application

Reviewer: What is the reason for combining the building and deployment steps? To my mind, the instructions will be easier to follow if they are considered in small steps, one at a time.

Author: It was because the Maven plugin method technically build and deploy in one command.

Google App Engine defaults to use the Java 11 runtime. 
If your Vaadin project is already configured to run with Java 11, then you can execute the two commands below, in the project directory, to 

. Generate the `JAR`.
+
[source,terminal]
----
mvn package -Pproduction
----

. Deploy your application.
+
[source,terminal]
----
gcloud app deploy target/myapp-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar
----

When the deployment has finished, the application URL will be displayed in the logs.

> If your project needs to run on a *different Java version*, then you have two options:

Reviewer: Let's just give one option.

Author: Ok, let us go with the Maven plugin option since it is also covered in GC's documentation.

. Generate the `JAR` using the command `mvn package -Pproduction` in this section and <<Manually Linking the `app.yaml` File,manually linking an `app.yaml` file during deployment>>.
. Build and deploy the production JAR using the <<App Engine Maven Plugin,App Engine Maven plugin>>.

> == Manually Linking the `app.yaml` File

Reviewer: How does that heading fit in the structure of the steps? We have the previous headings labeled as "step 1", "step 2", etc.. Now this heading will be out of place.

Author: I will try to use `loweralpha` subheadings to improve clarity.

You will then be asked to select a region.
You may want to choose the region that is geographically closest to your users.

== Step 5: Setup the App Engine Plugin for Maven

Add the App Engine Maven plugin to your project's `pom.xml` file.

.pom.xml
[source,xml]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>com.google.cloud.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>appengine-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>2.4.3</version>
    <configuration>
        <projectId>GCLOUD_CONFIG</projectId>
        <version>GCLOUD_CONFIG</version>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

> [NOTE]
> `projectId` and `version` must be set for the plugin to work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that `projectId` and `version` must be set for the plugin to work.
```

Let's try to minimize the use of admonitions as they don't help readability.

The value `GCLOUD_CONFIG` tells the Google Cloud CLI tools to use the `projectId` configured at <<Step 4: Create an App Engine Instance, step 4>>.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, make sure to use the latest version of the `appengine-maven-plugin`, which you can find at this link:https://search.maven.org/artifact/com.google.cloud.tools/appengine-maven-plugin[link].

```

> == Step 6 _(Optional)_: Override the Java Runtime Version

Reviewer: When testing with a Java 11 project, I got an error if `src/main/appengine/app.yaml` is missing:
```
Failed to execute goal com.google.cloud.tools:appengine-maven-plugin:2.4.3:deploy (default-cli) on project myapp: Execution default-cli of goal com.google.cloud.tools:appengine-maven-plugin:2.4.3:deploy failed: com.google.cloud.tools.appengine.AppEngineException: java.nio.file.NoSuchFileException: C:\Users\Tarek Oraby\Downloads\my-app - 2022-07-28T101013.666\my-app\src\main\appengine\app.yaml
```

Does that mean that this step isn't optional?

Author: I was able to reproduce the issue. It's weird because this [link ](https://cloud.google.com/appengine/docs/standard/java-gen2/configuring-your-app-with-app-yaml) said that the `yml` will automatically be generated, but maybe deploying with the maven plug-in and gcloud CLI tools are different.

> If you don't create an app.yaml file, the gcloud app deploy command can [create one when you deploy your application](https://cloud.google.com/appengine/docs/standard/java-gen2/testing-and-deploying-your-app#other_deployment_options). The app.yaml file that App Engine creates contains only the settings that are required to run your application.

I'm looking into why this is.

Author: Looks like the only command that generates the `app.yaml` file is `appengine:stage`, but then this will only work if [other files are present](https://cloud.google.com/appengine/docs/legacy/standard/java/maven-reference) such as `appengine-web.xml`, `web.xml`, `annotated servlets`.

Because we are using the maven plugin, this step is required. We are also unable to skip the `runtime` property either for both Java 11 or Java 17. If we just have an empty `app.yaml` file, then the error below will be thrown.

`[ERROR] Failed to execute goal com.google.cloud.tools:appengine-maven-plugin:2.4.3:deploy (default-cli) on project googlecloudappdemo: Execution default-cli of goal com.google.cloud.tools:appengine-maven-plugin:2.4.3:deploy failed: com.google.cloud.tools.appengine.AppEngineException: Cannot process application with runtime: null -> [Help 1]`

Reviewer: @dmitrilc what is the conclusion here? Is this step mandatory even if Java 11 is used? If so, we should change the title and text of this section.

Reviewer: Never mind. I see that you've implemented the changes already. I was looking at an outdated preview.

Google App Engine defaults to use the Java 11 runtime, so this step is only required if your Vaadin project needs to run on a different Java version.

[loweralpha]

> . Create a directory called `appengine` under `src/main`.

Reviewer: Shouldn't the `appengine` directory be created under `src` directly (not under `src/main`)?

Reviewer: Nevermind. It seems `src/main/appengine` is indeed the right one.

Reviewer: https://cloud.google.com/appengine/docs/standard/java-gen2/configuring-your-app-with-app-yaml

> . Create an empty file called `app.yaml` under `src/main/appengine`.
> . Add the code below into the `app.yaml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a file called `app.yaml` under `src/main/appengine`.
This file should have the following content.
```

+
.app.yaml
[source,yaml]
----
runtime: java17
----

> [NOTE]
> You can change the version number (`17`) to a version number of your choosing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can change the version number (`17`) to a version number of your choosing.
```

> == Step 7: Deploy to Google App Engine

Reviewer: There seems to be a necessary step before starting the deployment, which is that `Cloud Build` has to be enabled from the Google Cloud Console for the created project. Without doing so, I get the following error when I do `mvn package appengine:deploy -Pproduction`:
```
GCLOUD: ERROR: (gcloud.app.deploy) Error Response: [7] Access Not Configured. Cloud Build has not been used in project test-docs-changes-2 before or it is disabled. Enable it by visiting https://console.developers.google.com/apis/api/cloudbuild.googleapis.com/overview?project=test-docs-changes-2 then retry. If you enabled this API recently, wait a few minutes for the action to propagate to our systems and retry.
```

Author: You are correct. It was a one-click, so I must have missed it.

You can build and deploy using a single command below:

[source,terminal]
----
mvn package appengine:deploy -Pproduction
----

When the deployment has finished, the application URL will be displayed in the logs.

== Common Problems

> === Ensure that Google Cloud Billing is Enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Ensure Google Cloud Billing is Enabled
```

If the deployment fails with an error similar to `ERROR: (gcloud.app.deploy) Error Response: [7] Access Not Configured.`, then ensure that your Google Cloud account has billing enabled.
After it is enabled, try to deploy again.

=== Memory Limit

If you notice log messages similar to `Exceeded soft memory limit of 256 MB with X MB`, then that means your instance has ran out of RAM. You should consider https://cloud.google.com/appengine/docs/standard/java-gen2/config/appref[upgrading to a larger App Engine instance] that fits your needs.

[WARNING]

> Be mindful of costs when upgrading. Larger instances will most likely inccur more fees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be mindful of costs when upgrading.
Larger instances will most likely incur more fees.
```

== Step 5: Setup the App Engine Plugin for Maven

Add the App Engine Maven plugin to your project's `pom.xml` file.

.pom.xml
[source,xml]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>com.google.cloud.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>appengine-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>2.4.3</version>
    <configuration>
        <projectId>GCLOUD_CONFIG</projectId>
        <version>GCLOUD_CONFIG</version>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

Note that `projectId` and `version` must be set for the plugin to work.
The value `GCLOUD_CONFIG` tells the Google Cloud CLI tools to use the `projectId` configured at <<Step 4: Create an App Engine Instance, step 4>>.
Also, make sure to use the latest version of the `appengine-maven-plugin`, which you can find at this link:https://search.maven.org/artifact/com.google.cloud.tools/appengine-maven-plugin[link].

== Step 6 : Create the `app.yaml` File

Next, you need to create an `app.yaml` file.

[loweralpha]
. Create a directory called `appengine` under `src/main`.
. Create a file called `app.yaml` under `src/main/appengine`.
This file should have the following content.
+
.app.yaml
[source,yaml]
----

> runtime: java17
> ----
> You should change the java runtime version number (`java17`) in the `yaml` file to match the value of the `<java.version>` property in your `pom.xml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
runtime: java11
----
You should change the java runtime version number (`java11`) in the `yaml` file to match the value of the `<java.version>` property in your `pom.xml` file.
```
